sthitassa kamalodbhavastava hi nābhipaṅkeruhe
kuta: svididamambudhāvuditamityanālokayan |
tadīkṣaṇakutūhalāt pratidiśaṃ vivṛttānana-
ścaturvadanatāmagādvikasadaṣṭadṛṣṭyambujām ||1||
sthita: -	seated
sa kamalodbhava: -	he, the lotus born (Brahmaa)
tava hi nābhipaṅkeruhe	in Thy navel lotus itself
kuta: svit-	from where indeed
idam-ambudhau-uditam-	this (lotus) in the ocean has come up
iti-anālokayan	this not comprehending
tat-īkṣaṇa-kutūhalāt	out of eagerness to find the source
pratidiśaṃ vivṛtta-ānana: -	in all directions (he) turned his face
catu:-vadanatām-agāt-	(and thus) became endowed with four faces
vikasat-aṣṭa-dṛṣṭi-ambujām	with eight eyes (beautiful) like full blown lotuses
Brahma sitting on the full blown lotus emerging from Thy lotus-like navel, and wondering about its origin looked all around by turning his face in all the directions. He was thus endowed with four faces and lotus-like eight beautiful eyes.
mahārṇavavighūrṇitaṃ kamalameva tatkevalaṃ
vilokya tadupāśrayaṃ tava tanuṃ tu nālokayan |
ka eṣa kamalodare mahati nissahāyo hyahaṃ
kuta: svididambujaṃ samajanīti cintāmagāt ||2||
mahārṇava-vighūrṇitaṃ	tossing in the vast ocean
kamalam-eva tat-kevalaṃ	that lotus all alone
vilokya tat-upāśrayaṃ	seeing its support (the stem)
tava tanuṃ tu na-ālokayan	and not seeing Thy body
ka: eṣa	who is this (me)
kamala-udare mahati	inside this huge lotus
nissahāya: hi-ahaṃ	without any support (helpless) am I
kuta: svit-	from where
idam-ambujam samajani-	did this lotus originate
iti cintām-agāt	(he) was immersed in such thoughts
Brahmaa found himself to be all alone in the huge lotus which was tossing about in the vast ocean of causal waters. He saw the stem supporting the lotus but was unable to see Thy body and wondered as to who he was helpless and all alone and also of the source of the lotus.
amuṣya hi saroruha: kimapi kāraṇaṃ sambhve-
diti sma kṛtaniścayassa khalu nālarandhrādhvanā |
svayogabalavidyayā samavarūḍhavān prauḍhadhī -
stvadīyamatimohanaṃ na tu kalevaraṃ dṛṣṭavān ||3||
amuṣya hi saroruha:	certainly for this lotus
kim-api kāraṇam sambhavet-	there must be some cause (place) of origin
iti sma kṛtaniścaya: -	thus having concluded
sa khalu	he (Brahmaa) indeed
nāla-randhra-adhvanā	through the hollow in the lotus stem
sva-yoga-bala-vidhyayā	with the power of his yogic knowledge
smavarūḍhavān	descended
prauḍhadhī: -	he of mighty intellect
tvadīyam-ati-mohanaṃ	Thy this most enchanting
na tu kalevaraṃ dṛṣṭavān	form but could not perceive
Brahmaa who was of mighty intellect, decided that there must definitely be some source of this lotus. Using his yogic power he descended through the hollow of the lotus stem to look for the cause. He, however could not not see Thy most enchanting form.
tata: sakalanālikāvivaramārgago mārgayan
prayasya śatavatsaraṃ kimapi naiva saṃdṛṣṭavān |
nivṛtya kamalodare sukhaniṣaṇṇa ekāgradhī:
samādhibalamādadhe bhavadanugrahaikāgrahī ||4||
tata:	then
sakala-nālikā-vivara-mārgaga:	going through all the orifices of the stem
mārgayan	searching
prayasya śatavatsaraṃ	striving for hundred divine years
kim-api na-eva saṃdṛṣṭavān	could not see anything at all
nivṛtya kamala-udare	(he then) returned inside the lotus
sukhaniṣaṇṇa ekāgradhī:	sitting comfortably with one pointed intellect
samādhi-balam-ādadhe	resorted to deep samaadhi
bhavat-anugraha-eka-āgrahī	solely desirous of Thy grace
Brahmaa spent a hundred divine years strenuously searching through all the orifices of the lotus stem but he could not see anything. He returned to the lotus and sat calmly with one pointed concentration and resorted to deep samaadhi solely desirous of Thy grace.
śatena parivatsarairdṛḍhasamādhibandhollasat-
prabodhaviśadīkṛta: sa khalu padminīsambhava: |
adṛṣṭacaramadbhutaṃ tava hi rūpamantardṛśā
vyacaṣṭa parituṣṭadhīrbhujagabhogabhāgāśrayam ||5||
śatena parivatsarai: -	for a hundred (divine) years
dṛḍha-samādhi-bandha-ullasat-	of practising of undisturbed samaadhi, resulted
prabodha-viśadīkṛta:	(and ) the knowledge dawned (in him)
sa khalu padminīsambhava:	he, indeed, the lotus born (Brahmaa)
adṛṣṭacaram-adbhutaṃ	not seen by humans, the wonderful
tava hi rūpam-	Thy divine form
antardṛśā vyacaṣṭa	in his inner vision saw
parituṣṭadhī:-	(with) heart full of contentment
bhujaga-bhogabhāga-āśrayaṃ	on a part of the body of the great serpent, resting
The lotus born Brahmaa was absorbed in undisturbed samaadhi for a hundred divine years.The knowledge of Reality then dawned on him. He then had the vision of Thy wonderful form which humans cannot easily see, resting on a part of Aadishesha's (the great serpent's), body. So he was full of happiness and contentment.
kirīṭamukuṭollasatkaṭakahārakeyūrayuṅ-
maṇisphuritamekhalaṃ suparivītapītāmbaram |
kalāyakusumaprabhaṃ galatalollasatkaustubhaṃ
vapustadayi bhāvaye kamalajanme darśitam ||6||
kirīṭa-mukuṭa-ullasat-	a crown,with a diadem shining
kaṭaka-hāra-keyūra-yuk-	with bracelets, necklaces and shoulder ornaments
maṇi-sphurita-mekhalaṃ	with gems studded waist band
suparivīta-pītāmbaram	with beautifully worn yellow silk cloth
kalāya-kusuma-prabhaṃ	like the Kalaaya flower (blue lily) brilliant (blue complexion)
gala-tala-ullasat-kaustubhaṃ	(with) around the neck the shining Kaustubha jewel
vapu: -tat-ayi bhāvaye	on that form of Thine, O Lord! I meditate
kamalajanmane darśitaṃ	to the lotus born (Brahmaa) which was revealed
O Lord! That divine form of Thine with the golden crown, with a brilliant blue complexion like the beautiful Kalaaya flower (blue lily), with the shining Kaustubh jewel adorning Thy neck, with shoulder ornaments and bracelets , and with studded golden waistband and beautifully wearing a yellow silk garment (Peetaambara). This Thy form was revealed to the lotus born Brahmaa , on which I meditate.
śrutiprakaradarśitapracuravaibhava śrīpate
hare jaya jaya prabho padamupaiṣi diṣṭyā dṛśo: |
kuruṣva dhiyamāśu me bhuvananirmitau karmaṭhā-
miti druhiṇavarṇitasvaguṇabaṃhimā pāhi mām ||7||
śruti-prakara-	in several Vedic texts
darśita-pracura-vaibhava	declared, the abundant glory
śrīpate	O Consort of Laxmi!
hare	O Destroyer of all sorrows
jaya jaya prabho	Hail O Lord!
padam-upaiṣi diṣṭyā dṛśo:	Thou have appeared, by good fortune, before my eyes
kuruṣva	make
dhiyam-āśu me	my intellect, soon
bhuvana-nirmitau karmaṭhām-	in the creation of the world, capable
iti druhiṇa-varṇita-	thus, described by Brahmaa
svaguṇa-baṃhimā	(Thou possessing) countless excellences
pāhi mām	please protect me
"O Consort of Laxmi! Thy abundant glories have been sung of in the Vedaas. Hail O all-powerful Lord and remover of sorrows! It is my good fortune that Thou have revealed Thy sacred form to me. O Lord! Make my intelligence capable of creating the world." Thou, whose innumerable excellences were thus praised by Brahma, please be merciful to protect me.
labhasva bhuvanatrayīracanadakṣatāmakṣatāṃ
gṛhāṇa madanugrahaṃ kuru tapaśca bhūyo vidhe |
bhavatvakhilasādhanī mayi ca bhaktiratyutkaṭe-
tyudīrya giramādadhā muditacetasaṃ vedhasam ||8||
labhasva	may you attain
bhuvanatrayī-racana-dakṣatām-akṣatāṃ	in creating the three worlds, expertise unending
gṛhāṇa mat-anugrahaṃ	receive My blessings
kuru tapa: -ca bhūya: -vidhe	and do Tapa (penance) again O Brahmaa
bhavatu-akhila-sādhanī	may that accomplish everything
mayi ca bhakti: -ati-utkaṭā-	and intense devotion to me
iti-udīrya giram-	saying these words
ādadhā mudita-cetasaṃ vidhasam	rendered a happy mind to Brahmaa
O Brahmaa, may you be endowed with unending capability and expertise in the creation of the three worlds. May your devotion excel. Do penance again by which you will accomplish everything.' So saying Thou made Brahmaa's mind immensely happy.
śataṃ kṛtatapāstata: sa khalu divyasaṃvatsarā-
navāpya ca tapobalaṃ matibalaṃ ca pūrvādhikam |
udīkṣya kila kampitaṃ payasi paṅkajaṃ vāyunā
bhavadbalavijṛmbhita: pavanapāthasī pītavān ||9||
śataṃ kṛta-tapā:-tata:	for a hundred years having done penance, then
sa khalu divya-saṃvatsarān-	he (Brahmaa) indeed for hundred divine years
avāpya ca tapobalaṃ matibalaṃ	attained spiritual powers and mental powers
ca pūrva-adhikam	more than ever before
udīkṣya kila	and seeing indeed
kampitaṃ payasi paṅkajaṃ	the lotus swaying in the waters
vāyunā	by the wind
bhavat-bala vijṛmbhita:	by Thy prowess strengthened
pavanapāthasī pītavān	the wind and the waters (he) drank up
Brahmaa then did penance for another hundred divine years, by which he attained spiritual and mental powers even more than before. He saw the lotus on which he was seated, swaying in the causal waters. He, with the powers given by Thee, drank the wind and the waters.
tavaiva kṛpayā punassarasijena tenaiva sa:
prakalpya bhuvanatrayīṃ pravavṛte prajānirmitau |
tathāvidhakṛpābharo gurumarutpurādhīśvara
tvamāśu paripāhi māṃ gurudayokṣitairīkṣitai: ||10||
tava-eva kṛpayā	by Thy grace alone
puna: -	then
sarasijena tena-eva	out of that lotus itself
sa:	Brahmaa
prakalpya bhuvanatrayīṃ	created the three worlds
pravavṛte prajānirmitau	engaged himself in creating various species of beings
tathā-vidha-kṛpābhara:	(O Thou!) who abound in such compassion
gurumarutpurādhīśvara	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
tvam-āśu paripāhi māṃ	Thou soon protect me
guru-dayā-ukṣita: īkṣatai:	great mercy overflowing Thy glances
Brahmaa, then, by Thy grace created the three worlds out of that lotus itself and got engaged in creating the various species of beings. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Full of such compassion please cast Thy glance overflowing with great mercy on me and protect me soon.